Lillehaugen, Brook Danielle, George Aaron Broadwell, Michel R. Oudijk, & Laurie Allen. 2015.  
*Ticha: a digital text explorer for Colonial Zapotec*.  
First edition.(http://ticha.haverford.edu/)

Ticha means language in Zapotec, an indigenous language spoken in Southern Mexico. Thicha is a digital platform  
that was and is being created by an interdisciplinary team of scholars from different fields in the United States  
and Mexico at Haverford College Libraries: Brook D. Lillehaugen, George A. Broadwell, Michel R. Oudijk, and Laurie Allen.  
Ticha analyzes data through two main technological platforms: FLEx which is Fieldworks Language Explorer, a system for  
lexical and grammatical analysis, with Text Encoding Initiative standards for paleographic and translational representations  
of texts as stated in About the Project. The corpus presented is from the colonial period which focus on three main works,  
all of these texts come from the geographic region of Central Valley Zapotec Oaxaca. The first one is [Arte], a book published  
in 1578 by Juan de Cordova, a Spanish priest in the Dominican order. The second is Doctrina christiana en lengua castellana y  
çapoteca by Dominican priest Pedro de Feria. The third are the handwritten texts mainly written by native Zapotec speakers in  
Zapotec and some in Spanish about religious issues, testaments, wills, deeds, and letters. The digital platform is organized  
in the following three main categories: About, Colonial Zapotec, Explore the texts and Bibliography. The about presents  
information about the project, the team, acknowledgments and a contact us. In addition to this information, at the bottom of  
the about page, there are videos about the project with the team.


The Colonial Zapotec section includes a linguistic background and cultural context to situate the project in contemporary  
society and bring awareness to the users. Explore the texts has Arte en lengua zapoteca, which provides an outline, a PDF  
version, a sample page that includes: original text, transcription of the text, modern Spanish and English, and an original  
transcription of the text and a version in modern day Spanish. Doctrina christiana en lengua castellana has only information  
about the priest, a PDF version of the text and a sample page with: the original text, a transcription and a linguistic analysis.  
Finally, there are a total of fifty handwritten manuscripts, twenty one found in Spanish and twenty-nine in Zapotec, all are  
organized by name, year, town, archive, type of document and language, original text, and a transcription. There is a sample  
manuscript that includes the original page images in Zapotec and Spanish, transcriptions in Zapotec and in Spanish and following  
metadata: archive name, collection, call number, pages, year, date, primary parties, witnesses, and scribe. 

Each category gives open access for users to explore the material and interact with images of the original documents, transcriptions,  
translations to English and Spanish, download the texts, and be able to provide comments, suggestions to the team. Ticha is targeted  
for an academic audience in fields not limited to history, anthropology, linguistics, cultural studies and anyone who is interested  
about colonial Zapotec. Ticha is also for the one and half million Zapotec speakers in Mexico and the United States, especially  
in Los Angeles. In one of the videos, Janet Chávez Santiago, a Zapotec teacher from Teotitlan del Valle, Oaxaca stated the success  
and engagement from her students when comparing modern Zapotec to colonial Zapotec.The interest from her students is vast especially  
when many thought these corpuses of materials to be abroad, out of access. Scholars Carlos Aguirre and Javier Villa-Flores, state  
how the archive legitimizes forms of authority and credibility; thus, in thinking with Ticha it is important to reflect on who has  
access and how it can and should be used as a political platform with active and dynamic elements (12). 

To further address the question of accessibility, technology plays an important role in supporting a community. As Lara Putman  
states, “the impact of digitization on the knowability of past processes of whatever scale and locale is significant” (380).  
Ticha in this particular case, is serving a community that is actively working with the language, not only academics, but  
the Zapotec community. The interactive, feasible, self-explanatory access Ticha provides is changing the ways archives  
have been perceived to be. This is particularly seen with the implementation of audio recording from current community  
members of the 600 words found in the dictionary, a feature that is still in progress. Through the work shown in Ticha,  
one of their main goals is to extend bridges and render visible voices from the past, present and future to acknowledge  
a community that has been silenced. Therefore, as the digital archive develops and expands, how will Ticha continue to  
serve different audiences, reflect several voices in the archive, and continue to emphasize a sense of reciprocity to  
the Zapotec community. 

